Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome the manager-- OK, now.
As I was saying,
please welcome the manager of
Mac OS X file systems engineering,
Clark Warner.
Thank you.
The stage police are watching me.
And I've heard from my spies that when
I turn around to jump on the stage,
something bad's going to happen to me.
So I have to be careful.
I've noticed that the stage
is higher this year than last,
so I think I'm ready.
Thank you.
Welcome.
So we have, we hope,
some really good information
for you folks whether you're
just a user of Mac OS X,
whether you're a developer
on top of Mac OS X,
or whether or not you actually want
to implement a file system or some
kernel extension of the file system.
And we hope that by the end of the
session you'll have some vague ideas of
what you need to do and whether or not
you need to do some of these things.
So we've got information
on the interfaces,
we've got some information on
differences between Mac OS X and
Mac OS 9 that come from our BSD heritage,
and we'll also have a little
description of some of the differences
between the different volume
formats that we support in Mac OS X.
We have a relatively significant
architectural change to tell you about
in Mac OS X involving our buffer cache.
And so we're going to spend some time
on that at the end of the session,
hopefully enough to give you a feel for
what we've done and why we've done it.
And for those folks who have actually
been to a file system session before,
then you're going to see
a fair amount of review.
And we think that's needed
for a couple of reasons.
One is, as Steve said in the
whole keynote on Monday,
Mac OS X is becoming very real.
And there are probably, we expect,
a lot more folks who have not actually
been introduced to any of the technology
in Mac OS X who are going to need to
hear some of the stuff we've actually
talked about in previous sessions.
And also,
given that it's much more real now,
I imagine there may be a few of you
who perhaps weren't as concerned
about what you were hearing in
years past and will want to hear
some of that stuff over again.
With that having been said,
there will be some new stuff.
Let me start by giving you a
brief overview of the Core OS.
If you went to the
Darwin overview session,
then you've seen this picture already.
In fact,
My tech lead has supplied me
with this really handy laser
pointer so I can point out the
coolest part of the Darwin system.
And it goes like this.
We want to tell you a little bit
about the internal architecture
of the file system as well.
And this diagram is something you're
going to want to keep in your head
as we move along in the presentation.
So, several key things
I need you to remember.
The application environments, Classic,
Carbon, Cocoa,
they all have their own way of
interfacing with the file system.
And we're going to talk about
those interfaces a little bit at
a later time in the presentation.
The actual stuff that my group
works on is here inside of Darwin,
inside of the BSD kernel.
And we have two interfaces
of particular significance,
which we'll talk about in
some detail today also,
as well as a collection of
volume formats that we support.
So, our basic interface is
a BSD Unix interface.
But BSD traditionally doesn't
support in its volume formats some
of the sophisticated features that
have been available in Mac OS X.
So, namely things like resource forks,
catalog information,
and that sort of stuff.
And so we've extended the
BSD interfaces to allow for
retrieval of that and establishment
of that sort of information.
Likewise, inside of BSD,
there is a relatively clean
abstract layer called the
virtual file system layer.
And that basically separates
the file system dependent from
file system independent layer
inside of the BSD kernel.
And if you wanted to develop
a file system yourself because
you had a new device type,
or if you wanted to develop
a new system yourself because
you had a new device type,
or if you wanted to develop
a new system yourself because
you had a new device type,
or if you wanted to develop a
new system yourself because you
had a new system yourself because
you had a new system yourself,
or if you wanted to develop a file
system plug-in which will intercept all
the file system calls and then deliver
information to file systems beneath,
this is the interface that
you would actually write to.
or if you wanted to develop a file
system plug-in which will intercept all
the file system calls and then deliver
information to file systems beneath,
this is the interface that
you would actually write to.
We're not going to talk in great
detail about the volume formats,
but suffice it to say that we
support a number of them in Mac OS X.
We've got support for
the BSD fast file system,
which was our implementation
of the Unix file system,
HFS and HFS+, the network file system,
AFS by virtue of the
Apple share server team,
they've done an
AFS client implementation,
and more to come.
Come.
So here's how we're going to do it.
Here's our session outline.
We're going to do a little
status update to let you know
what's changed in Mac OS X.
We're going to talk about some of
the new features of the system since
last we got together at last year's
Worldwide Developers Conference,
focusing on some of the stuff
we've done for DP4 and for DP3.
And we're going to, as I mentioned,
talk about some of the interfaces,
the various ways of getting at file
system functionality in Mac OS X.
And we're going to talk about some
of those differences I mentioned
between different volume formats and
arising out of the fact that we have
a BSD system and a Mac OS X system,
a Mac OS system coexisting.
And we'll talk,
we'll do a review of the virtual file
system interfaces themselves to give
you an idea of what they look like
and how you might make use of them.
And we're going to talk in some
detail about the changes in our
buffer caching architecture so that,
again,
if you're one of those Darwin folks
that is building a new file system,
you'll have an idea of what sort of
things you'll need to do to change to
work with our new unified buffer cache.
The next new feature could be yours.
We're going to talk a little bit
about Darwin and maybe some ideas
about what things could happen next.
So here's our status update.
Back at this time last year,
we demonstrated to you,
for the first time ever in public,
a system, a Unix-based system,
in that case Mac OS X,
booted off of an HFS+ volume.
And it was the first time ever in public.
And this year,
we're happy to report that this
is just a standard humdrum,
boring old part of the system now.
At DP4, and even back in DP3,
the primary volume format is HFS+.
The server team has added support
for the Apple FileShare protocol,
as I've mentioned,
and it's actually in DP4.
If you look in your demos folder,
you'll find an application
called TestAFPClient,
and you can use that application
to mount an Apple Share IP-based
volume on your Mac OS X system.
Now, it's still a little early
and still a little new.
You may run into some bugs,
but it does work.
I have used it.
We also are well underway with
the development of a new version
of the Unix-based system.
We also are well underway with
the development of a new version
of the Unix-based system.
with our universal disk
format implementation.
It's not in the release yet.
It turns out that UDF is very much
a kitchen sink of file systems.
It has just about every feature any
file system person could ever imagine
and so it's quite a challenge to
build support for into the system.
But we're well underway with that.
We also have added
support for large files.
It's not exposed yet for your use
because as a result of the new
caching architecture we're actually
relying on the virtual memory
system for IO in some cases and
the VM interfaces are still 32 bit.
But all of the file system interfaces
now are 64 bit so that we'll be
able to support very large files in
Mac OS X and the virtual memory system
is going to change to accommodate that.
Also important to note is that all
of the interfaces into the core file
system at the BSD level are UTF-8,
take UTF-8 strings.
The important thing about UTF-8,
it is a single byte character
encoding of Unicode characters.
Unicode, for those who don't know,
is an international standard that allows
for just about every character in any
language that's in popular use today.
Up to 65,000 character spaces
are reserved in the Unicode set,
generally two bytes.
But a single byte encoding of Unicode
was invented and it's called UTF-8.
The key feature of UTF-8 is
that you can pass it through
normal C string interfaces.
It guarantees that there won't
be any null termination where
there isn't supposed to be.
And the first 128 bits, sorry,
the first 128 characters in UTF-8
are just regular ASCII characters.
And so for people that are just
dealing with a regular ASCII system,
it's going to look the same to
you even though we've dictated
throughout the kernel that all
file names are going to be UTF-8.
It's not until you start seeing
shifting of the file names that
you can see that it's going to look
the same to you even though we've
dictated throughout the kernel that
all file names are going to be UTF-8.
It's not until you start seeing
shift gist and so forth kanji
representations that the byte
stream will start to look different.
But the beauty is, again,
you can pass it through
car star interfaces.
We also have a number of new features
besides what we've given you on the
status update and we're going to
talk about those in more detail.
Actually,
I'm going to have my tech lead talk about
those in more detail as we move along.
So I have to apologize a little bit.
Our radar screen hasn't changed much.
If you don't remember,
our definition of the radar screen
is things that I think we're
going to have at some point,
but I'm not sure and I'm
unwilling to tell you.
So, you know, you can ask the question,
but that's the answer you'll get.
But we do recognize that a lot of
people are really interested in a
directory change notification feature.
And quite frankly,
we had sort of hoped to have it by now,
but there were other
things that took priority.
It is, however,
something we're still considering.
Another thing we'd like to do is
allow NFS access to HFS+ volumes.
It turns out this is actually
quite a bit trickier than it
would seem on the surface.
And HFS after all, HFS+ after all rather,
has pretty much all the features now that
a UFS or a Berkeley Fast File System has.
And so it seems like it would
be trivial to do the same things
that UFS does to allow NFS access.
But the problem is there are
a number of architectural
issues with Mac OS X overall
that make this rather tricky.
And in a nutshell,
the Carbon application environment,
when it runs across a volume that
doesn't support some of the features
that are associated with HFS+, like
resource forks and catalog information,
access by ID and so forth, well,
it mimics that for you.
It actually builds its own
environment for creating its own
separate resource fork and its
own separate catalog information,
does its own ID to path name mapping,
so that as an application,
you don't have to care if you're on a
UFS volume or if you're talking over NFS.
You can make the same Carbon calls
you've always made and they'll just work.
Well, the problem with that is,
on HFS+, we have local support
for all of those features.
And so if you were to export
an HFS+ volume over NFS,
locally, the clients would use the native
resource fork and catalog information.
Remotely,
because the NFS protocol doesn't
have support for this sort of thing,
Carbon is going to see that
it's NFS and start mimicking it.
And so the remote clients will have
a different view of the resource fork
data and of the catalog information
than the local clients will do.
So that's actually
quite a problem for us.
We're still figuring out
how exactly to solve that.
In the short term,
we're going to have to figure
out how exactly to solve that.
In the long term,
we'll probably have some configurations
where you can NFS export HFS+ volumes,
even though those problems aren't solved.
And for people that just
want to use it in a server
configuration and don't worry,
aren't so concerned about how
the local access works and are
able to step around the issues.
We also would like to add
some new file systems,
specifically the Joliet
extensions to ISO.
At some point,
we'd like to have an NFS implementation
and even more importantly,
an implementation that will allow us
to read files from DOS and Windows.
So the FAT16 or FAT32, some,
one of the Windows format file systems.
So now, we actually do have a demo.
And I'm going to call Conrad
Minchel up to bring it to you.
I'm always a little bit jealous
of the QuickTime guys because
they get to do these big,
fancy multimedia demos.
And they have movies and
it's really exciting.
And file systems,
we never get to do that stuff.
And they just won't let us do that stuff.
So we're going to sort of skirt
the edge a little bit and try to
get in at least a picture for you.
And with that,
I'm going to introduce Conrad Minchel,
who is one of the file system
engineers engineers on my team.
So this actually got working
about 20 minutes ago.
And hopefully it's still working.
A DVD RAM disk installed in this system
down below and it's already mounted.
And it's mounted on /data here.
So I can see, oops, yeah.
So I can see I have one
movie already there.
So last year at this time we gave you
the first ever public demonstration of
booting off of HFS and HFS+. You can
imagine what might happen next year
when you all pay your money again and
come back to see us at the Worldwide
Developers Conference in 2001.
So with that,
I'd like to bring up Pat Dirks,
my tech lead,
and he's going to walk you through
some of the cool and awesome
new features that we've added
to the file system in Mac OS X.
I'll do without that.
Yeah,
it's pretty amazing to think that last
year around this time we just very
carefully demoed the first booting
and rooting off an HFS+ file system.
It's been quite a year.
I could take a moment and talk about some
of the new features that we've added.
Prime amongst them probably,
once you realize that you are
running on HFS+ file systems is
Mac OS X is a multi-user system
and at its core is a BSD base.
Every file and every directory
in the system is going to have
permissions assigned to it.
Those permissions are a bit like what
you may have seen on AFP file servers,
but they're not quite like it.
There's a similar division between
owners of files and directories and
sort of everyone or guest access class
of people and then there's a group
that you can assign to every object.
You can assign separate
read/write or execute permissions
to each of these groups.
Underneath, although you'll see names
in most of the interfaces,
these are mapped to numeric identifiers
that are mapped out of a database.
What access you have to any given
file or directory is determined by
the user ID of the running process.
That's all fine and well if you're
running on a single big Unix
system where things get mounted
and they stay mounted all the time,
but it's a different story if
you're running in a Mac OS type
environment where you've got zip
disks that you're carrying around
that you're popping up and dropping
in and out of machines all the time.
You have a problem where the numeric
IDs that are assigned on a disk that
may be created on your neighbor's
system may not mean anything in the
system that you have created or they
may map to entirely different names.
Simply plugging in a disk and
using the permissions on there,
even though HFS+ has provisions
for storing the user ID and
group ID and permissions
information is not sufficient,
you have to worry about what to
do when there are permissions
on there that make no sense.
We wanted to make that as
transparent as possible,
and to that end we decided to
tag every volume with a 64-bit
ID that we make up the first
time that volume is initialized.
The system actually maintains a list
of IDs of volumes that it knows about,
and it only uses the privileges on
those disks whose ID is in the list.
If the ID is not in the list,
we fall back to a mode where we ignore
all the privileges on the volume and
we make the person who's logged in
on the machine the owner of the disk.
That's the first step.
The second step is to make sure
that the disk is in the list.
The third step is to make sure
The fourth step is to make sure
that the disk is in the list.
The fifth step is to make sure
The sixth step is to make sure
that the disk is in the list.
be the owner of all the files and
all the directories on that system.
The only thing to be aware of is
that if a disk is used in that mode
and you create new things on there,
those will also be tagged with unknown.
When the disk comes back to
the originating system where
the permissions are used,
they'll see unknown on there.
They'll get the same treatment.
The person logged in on that machine
will be the full owner of it,
but that's kind of a little
subtlety to be aware of.
Basically, what we strove to do was to
approach as much as possible
the regular Mac OS experience
of being able to take a disk,
put it in your machine,
and use it in any way you see fit.
We don't want permissions
to get in the way of that.
Something else we did is an extension
of something that is an API that's
already provided for AFP URLs,
allowing you to manipulate server
references as URLs and have
the system mount those for you.
So this is currently
supported only for AFP,
but the idea is that
we'll extend it over time.
And it's the perfect implementation,
in fact it is the implementation,
for the connect to dialog in the finder,
you just type in a URL and
the system takes that URL,
figures out what file system uses that,
finds a place in the file
system to make that appear,
creates that directory, mounts it,
makes the server connection
and makes it available to you.
So it's a very nice API.
We're working on that,
it's still evolving.
If you think you have URL schemes that
would make sense to tie into that,
we're still discussing whether
we want to make this dynamically
pluggable or a small static list,
come talk to us afterwards.
But that's how we envision it.
providing access to URLs over
time through the file system.
We've added a number of features to the
system to help support the HFS+ APIs.
Long file names are prime amongst them.
On Mac OS, using the Unicode APIs,
you can now create and manipulate
files with 255 Unicode characters.
And we've extended the
BSD APIs to do the same thing.
As Clark mentioned,
UTF-8 is now the standard
interface for all files and
directories in the file system.
And so we allow you to pass a UTF-8
encoding of a string of up to 255 Unicode
characters into the kernel that way.
So everything is done
through UTF-8 in the kernel.
And last but not least,
we've supplied new system
calls that allow us to support
the bulk enumeration calls.
And we'll get into some more
detail about that in a moment.
I want to talk both a little bit
in review and a little bit to bring
you up to date on the interfaces
and talk about the differences
between the behavior of possibly the
same code on Mac OS X and Mac OS.
So when you're writing your application,
you've basically got your choice
of one of three environments,
and they all make sense at
sort of different times.
They're all layered on
top of a common BSD layer,
though, and as Clark mentioned,
that's where we really do our work.
And inside BSD,
there is a virtual file system
or VFS layer that all file
system calls get translated to,
and that takes care of doing the file
system specific implementation of
some particular feature or operation.
So Carbon is the natural way
to port your application.
If you have a Mac OS application,
it should be a cinch to Carbonize it.
And the Carbon interfaces are,
in most ways, exactly like the existing
Mac OS interfaces.
If you're writing a
brand new application,
you may want to consider
writing to the Cocoa APIs.
They're a completely different
object-oriented set of APIs.
They were designed-- they were designed
from the outset to be very portable
to a number of different environments.
And so they don't support some
of the features that you may
expect on HFS or on Mac OS.
So there are no resource forks.
There's no support for Finder info,
those sorts of things.
But you can have a very uniform
API to general file storage.
Finally, of course, there's Classic.
If you do nothing to your application,
it will run in Classic.
And obviously,
all the calls are supported there, too.
And as I said,
all of those are implemented in
the PSD layer that we've extended
with an actually surprisingly
small number of new system calls.
I guess the first thing to be aware of,
when Mac OS 9 came out,
we introduced a number of new APIs to
let you operate on files and directories
with Unicode and with FSRefs,
a new form of file reference.
And all those calls are
supported in Carbon.
So I think the message is clear.
Think Unicode, think FSRefs.
It'll work great in Carbon.
The full range of calls is supported.
Cat search is supported.
It's not something that's
in traditional BSD,
but we've added system
calls to support that.
And so anything you can do in 9.0 Carbon,
it's fully supported.
The new Get Catalog Info Bulk
Call that I refer to is a great call.
It's a bit like the AFP Enumerate call,
which lets you get directory
information on a number of objects
in the directory in one single call.
And it has a very flexible method of
specifying what it is you're interested
in about each particular object.
So you can say, I want to get just the
name and the finder info,
for instance,
for all the objects in the system.
And it will return just that to you.
You'll see that actually appear in
a number of different calls and some
of the new system calls as well.
There are methods using a bitmap
type of specification to let you
specify which attributes or which
pieces of information about files and
directories it is you're interested in.
And it's great because the other
thing that we've done is we've
added a bitmap to the system.
So that way,
the underlying file systems don't have
to go and possibly make up information
that you're not even interested in.
I mean, for the longest time on Mac OS,
we've carried around this number of
directories in the root field just
because it was there in MFS when
the Mac was first introduced.
And we had no way to tell whether
somebody who called GetVolInfo
actually needed that field or not.
And so this will help
us move away from that.
So the BSD extensions.
Um...
Get Adder List and Set Adder List are
new ways of getting information out
about individual files or directories.
They basically let you specify a buffer
that your information will be filled into
and a bitmap with a couple of fields,
very much like the AFP Get Fault
Airpods call again.
You can say,
"I want the finder info about files.
I want the fork links," and that's it,
and you'll get exactly that returned.
SearchFS is a very direct implementation
of the CatSearch functionality,
and all the things you can do with
CatSearch you can do in this system,
and it's all implemented
through SearchFS.
ExchangeData is an implementation
of the file exchange functionality
that lets you do save saves of data.
These are all things that we needed to
do to support Carbon's functionality,
but there were no equivalent
BSD calls to do it.
Most other things actually map pretty
straightforwardly to existing BSD calls.
All the various variants of open
and opendf and whatnot all just map
to the straight old BSD open call.
For those areas where we didn't have
any system calls to support them,
we made up these new ones.
F-control is an existing
BSD system call that lets you do
various operations on open files,
and we added an option to
let you do file allocation,
for instance.
The allocate call is not something
that is known in the BSD system.
Get-Dir Entries Adder is the
system call that was added
to do the bulk enumeration.
And if you are at all familiar
with the attribute list,
get-adder list, and set-adder list API,
you'll see this is very familiar.
There is an attribute list that is
passed in and a buffer and a size
that you specify and a few parameters
that let you say which entries in
the directory you're interested in,
how many items you are
prepared to take back,
and various options that you can pass.
And with that one call,
you can get information on a whole
number of directory entries all at once,
possibly the whole directory
in one single call.
So it's a very efficient
way to enumerate file data.
The VFS layer is something we'll get
into in a little bit more detail later,
but as I said,
that is the layer inside the kernel that
separates the file system independent
system call layer from the file system
specific implementation of certain calls.
and it basically manipulates these
abstract data structures called V nodes
that are specific to each file system
and there's a dispatch table that's
associated with each V node that lets
the system dispatch to the file system
specific implementation of some call.
If you're writing file systems,
you'll get very familiar
with that layer of interface.
Now, there are some differences in the
way that code works even if the
code looks the same or similar.
Unix for instance,
various flavors of Unix
and BSD among them,
lets you delete open files which
was always a big no-no under Mac OS,
you get FBC error if you try to do that.
We support both semantics.
If you're calling the
delete call in Carbon,
you'll call a variant of
unlink that actually will
return an error if it's open.
But if you are a BSD or a
Cocoa application calling unlink to
remove a file from the directory,
that will succeed even if it's open.
So it's possible that files you have
open will get deleted from the catalog.
That's not as wild of an
adjustment as you might think
because even under Mac OS 9,
it's always possible that something
would get deleted or renamed out
from under you and no longer appear
where you thought it appeared.
And Don may get an interview.
Okay.
So I'm going to go ahead and jump
in a moment into the kinds of
games we play to make this happen.
But it's something to be mindful of.
Hard links are a strictly Unixism.
It's a way for two entries in the catalog
to refer to the same exact data on disk.
And this is not an alias that
you resolve to get to the data.
These are two equivalent names to
get to the same data on the disk.
So again,
that may be something to be mindful of.
One thing in the Unix file,
there's a lot of things that you can
do to get to the same data on disk.
So you can do that by
using the file system APIs.
It's very careful not to return you
data that you have not yourself written.
And if you're just streaming out a file,
that's no issue.
You're writing everything
before you'll ever read it.
But you should be careful of
some things that may have made
perfect sense at times on Mac OS,
like calling setEof to extend
the file to its maximum length
before you start writing the data.
Now,
to prepare for the possibility that you
might actually read that data since the
logical end of file has been moved out.
That whole interview is a very
important part of the process.
And the intervening gap between
the current EOF and where you're
setting it is zero-filled.
So you may be doing gigantic IOs where
before you were doing absolutely none.
Calls like allocate are fully supported
and they're a much better way of making
sure that the data is available on
disk before you make your write calls,
for instance, than setEof is.
One sort of quirk in the BSD APIs is
that there is no notion of a create
date the way there is on HFS+. HFS+
volumes have them and we support them.
But if somebody uses the
BSD APIs to manipulate the
modification dates of files,
the create dates are actually untouched.
And until we decide to
do something about this,
you may actually see modification
dates that are prior to the
creation date of a file.
It's a little weird, but again,
something to be mindful of.
And then, of course, the path separators,
Unix, BSD,
all uses slash to separate path names.
And HFS, Mac OS uses colons.
And then, if you have a path
that's not a path name,
you should be aware that the path
names that you use in your Carbon calls
are not the same path names that you
should use if you make BSD calls.
The system underneath actually translates
between colon and slash for you.
And the results may be surprising.
If you call BSD APIs to
enumerate a directory,
you may see files with slashes in them,
but they will appear in the BSD APIs.
So they will appear to you
with colons inside the name,
because we can't pass up a
path name through the BSD layer
that has a slash in it.
We can safely pass one
with a colon in it.
So between Carbon and BSD in the system,
there's all kinds of colon and
slash translation going on.
And if you are spanning these two layers,
if you're doing some BSD calls
and some Carbon calls,
you should be careful
about path name separators.
Finally, we support a range of
different file systems,
and they all have their
own implementation,
and they all have their own quirks.
Unix systems, BSD, no exception.
The UFS file system has
long been case sensitive.
We decided not to make a case sensitive
implementation of HFS or HFS+.
So HFS is the same case insensitive
but case preserving file system.
But you may be running into other
file systems unbeknownst to you
because you're just traversing
the catalog hierarchy and run into
UFS volumes that are mounted there,
which are case sensitive.
So if your application counts on being
able to find the same name under two
different case representations of it,
you're going to be surprised.
And that's actually very common in code,
where you refer to a header
file first by one name,
then by another.
If you do it on UFS.
UFS.
You may run into trouble like that.
Sparse files are something that UFS has
long supported that there's been no
precedent for on HFS+, although we've
had some requests for it on occasion.
Basically,
sparse files are a way for the file
system to store your data files
without storing the gaps in the
data blocks that you've written.
So you can seek out to a location
two gigabytes into your file and
write 10 bytes of data there,
and on UFS that will actually
only take about 10 bytes on disk.
That's not something that's supported on
HFS+. So if you try that because you're
porting a BSD application or something,
you may be surprised to find that step
one is to allocate two gig of data and
then go write your ten bytes of data.
Hard links are supported
on HFS+, but not on HFS.
They're supported on UFS and NFS as well.
But, again,
if this is something you count on,
you better make sure you know what
file system it is you're talking about.
And so there are a
number of subtle gotchas,
even though the basic
application that you have,
if you ported the Carbon and
run it on HFS+ volume,
will run remarkably well unchanged.
And you may be unaware of
the difference altogether.
At this point,
I'd like to bring up Don to talk about
some of the differences between the way
HFS+ volumes are used in the system.
Don?
Thank you.
Okay, as Pat said,
I'm going to talk about
some of the changes we made
to the HFS+ volume format.
In general,
almost all these changes should be
transparent to all of you out there,
but some people like to hard code things,
and so for that reason,
you're going to have to suffer
through all these boring details here.
The first set of changes involve
what we do during initialization in
Mac OS X for HFS+ volume formats.
Primarily we made some changes for
performance and for some of the
features like hard links that we added.
The allocation block size,
which used to be
[Transcript missing]
And like I said,
we have the startup file now where
we use that to boot for Mac OS X.
However, I should note that that startup
file is not in the DP4 release.
That will be in a follow-on release.
The last mounted version up
until now had been set at 8.1.
Now that we're using
a different code base,
we've upped that to 10.0.
As Pat mentioned, there's some BSD fields
that we now are used.
The permissions data and
the last access date.
We now enforce the permissions and
we initialize them under Mac OS X.
And on every read and write access,
we set the last access date.
Finder info is mentioned here.
It's not really Finder,
it's not really file system data,
but people tended to use
it in file system calls.
So I mentioned it in here.
Typically, like the type and creator and
the invisible bit are often used.
However,
you should be aware that in Mac OS X,
often they'll be uninitialized.
So if you're doing searches for
criteria on type and creator,
be aware that they might
not be initialized.
One interesting thing we discovered
when we were debugging is that there's
occasionally in Mac OS 9 you'll
get file names with embedded nulls,
mainly due because they
had a Pascal interface and
you could actually do that.
It's not a good thing to do,
but so to support those and
not trip up some of the stacks
and the file system layers,
we allow them to go through,
but you can no longer create them.
In the past, we really didn't have
any reserved file names,
but a long time ago, pre-System 7,
we discouraged the use
of dot prefixes in files,
mainly because the file system and the
device manager shared a common open call,
and we needed to differentiate
between opening a file and a device.
That support is no
longer there or needed,
so we no longer discourage it.
In fact, given our VSD underpinnings,
we have lots of files
that start with a dot,
but that's not a bad thing anymore.
Of course, you should avoid naming
any file dot or dot dot,
because we use those in the VSD layer.
There is some pseudo metadata,
additional.
In the past,
we had Apple Share and the desktop DB.
Now we have symbolic links and the
hard link and the deleted files.
All this stuff,
in terms of the pseudo metadata,
should be completely transparent.
In Carbon,
you'll see some links as aliases.
And in the POSIX and the Cocoa layers,
they'll actually automatically resolve,
so you won't even see them.
But we just tell you about
that so you know about them.
We updated the disk first aid and the
FSDK to be able to fix hard links and
we came any of the files that were
We're hidden for the delete on busy.
And if you're doing any
type of repair utility,
we encourage you to also add that
minimal support into your application.
Back to you, Clark.
Thanks, John.
If you attended Steve's
overview on Monday,
you know that there are a
million different ways that
QuickTime technology is distributed
on CD-ROMs of famous artists,
sorry, audio CDs of famous artists.
He also actually had a cereal box with a
CD in it that had QuickTime technology.
Well, I have great news.
As part of the whole new era of
respect for file systems that got us
this large hall to get together in,
my boss just informs me that we have made
a deal with the makers of generic cereal.
for the distribution of file system
technology in the lesser stores near you.
Alright, let's talk about the
virtual file system layer.
So, to begin,
this is the layer in the file system
that you would implement to if you
wanted to develop a new system.
There are two fundamental uses of it:
a new file system for a new
device type or a new protocol,
or what we call a file system stack.
The way file system stacks work is they
basically implement a set of functions
to the VFS interfaces and they sit on
top of an existing file system and at the
bottom they call that same VFS interface
for a lower file system to process.
So, for example, if you wanted to build
an encryption system,
you could build a file system stack,
you would support the VFS interfaces,
most of your VFS calls would simply
call the file system underneath you.
But if you wanted to do I/O,
then you would look at the buffer,
encrypt it if it was coming in,
decrypt it if it was coming out,
and so you would call the file
system below you to get the data,
make your manipulation,
and then return to the caller.
Or you would get the
information from the caller,
do your manipulation,
and then call the file system
below you to finally do the write.
So that's roughly what the VFS is for.
Two key data structures you need
to know about if you are really
seriously thinking about implementing
a file system or a file system stack.
And the first is the VNode,
which stands for virtual node.
And this is the key data structure
that represents a file in our system.
If you programmed in Mac OS,
it's similar to a file control block,
an FCB, but there is one key difference.
VNodes are created whenever a
file is referenced for any reason,
not just when a file is opened.
So if you just wanted to
get file system statistics,
if you did the equivalent
of a getcatinfo,
we're going to allocate a
VNode inside of our system and
we're going to initialize it.
And it's going to stay
around for a while.
We have a cache of these in the
system and up to thousands of
them that just stay in case you
want to reference that file again
so we don't have to recreate it.
And we also have another
key data structure,
a mount structure,
which is kind of similar
to a volume control block.
So these are the two key data structures
that you'll need to work with if you're
wanting to implement a file system.
There are also two key
segments of the VFS interface.
There are what we call VFS calls,
and I apologize for the name confusion,
but we inherited that.
And there are also VNode
operations or VOP calls.
And the reason they're called this is
because if you actually look in our code,
if you look in the file
system independent layer
of system call processing,
you'll see some work go on and
then you'll see a call to something
called VFS underbar something
or VOP underbar something.
And what those are are macros
that look for the dispatch table
for the right operation to call.
Given the type of a VNode that it's about
to make the call on or the type of file
system it's about to make the call on.
If it's a VFS operation,
you'll see VFS underbar
operation and it will call the
VFS routine for that file system.
If it's a file based operation,
you'll see a VOP underbar operation,
VOP remove, VOP open,
VOP close and so forth.
And it will make that call to the
underlying routine in that file system.
So while you see all these
VOP macros scattered about,
if you look at the implementation
for any given file system,
you'll see that they have
routines called in the HFS,
for example, HFS close, HFS open,
HFS remove.
Those are the routines that will
actually be called when you see
VOP calls inside of the code.
So let me give you a walkthrough
of some of the VFS operations.
Actually,
I think we have the full list of these.
One quick note:
to instantiate a file system in BSD,
and this is the model we've
inherited in Mac OS X,
you first create a directory
and then you mount the device,
which corresponds basically to
our petition on a hard disk drive
or some protocol that alludes you
to a hard disk over on a server.
You actually mount the device on
top of the existing directory.
If the directory was not empty,
all the files and anything that was
in that directory disappears from your
system until you unmount it again.
So usually we do this
on empty directories.
So you'll create a directory,
you'll mount the device
on top of the directory,
and from that point on,
that directory will be a window into
all of the files on that partition that
you've mounted there in that place.
VFS mount and VFS unmount are the
calls you use to manipulate that.
So VFS mount is going to create
and fill in the root V node,
the V node for the root directory that
you've just mounted on that directory,
and it'll initialize the mount structure.
VFS unmount is going to clean up the
mount structure and remove that device
from that file system you create,
from the directory that you've created,
and from that point on,
you'll no longer be able
to access the files on that
volume or on that partition.
But you will be able to access any
files that were left in that directory
when you mount it on top of it.
VFS Root's job is to give you back the
root V node given a mount structure.
So if you're trying to
do path name processing,
you're starting at a mount point,
this will get you to the root V node.
StatFS is just a get statistics call.
It's kind of like a get ball info.
It is give me some information
about this overall volume,
things like the overall size or
the amount of free space available,
that sort of thing.
VFS VGet, we won't get into detail,
but this is the call we use to
support access by identifier.
So if you want to implement a
file system that allows access by
directory ID name the way HFS+ does,
then you'll need to support VFS VGet.
VFS init is just your basic file
system initialization routine.
You may or may not need
to support VFS init.
It depends on whether or not you have
some global file system-wide data that
you need initialized at mount time,
or I mean when your system
is first initialized.
VFS FH to VP, this stands for File Handle
to VNode Pointer,
and VP to FH stands for
VNode Pointer to File Handle,
and these calls are specifically for
supporting NFS access to your volume.
These are the two key guys
for getting file handles sent
across NFS for remote access.
And sys control and quota apple,
we won't go into detail about those,
but those are for supporting
system-level controls of your
file system and for quotas.
We're not going to give you an exhaustive
list of all of the VNode operations,
but I will tell you about
some of the important ones.
And these are the ones you'll
actually be tested on later when we
talk about our caching architecture.
So, VOP lookup.
This is the most important and most
complicated of all the VNode operations.
And its job is to handle
path name resolution.
So basically,
you give it a path name that
starts from a directory that
belongs to your file system.
And you give it a string that
contains a bunch of path name
elements separated by a slash.
And then this routine will
give you back a VNode.
And it's generally called iteratively as
we do the lookup process in the system.
So, you'll get a component pointer,
you'll get a VNode that corresponds to
a directory through your lookup call.
You'll return the VNode for
the next thing in the path.
You'll get called again if that's one
of yours and it will go on and on and on
until lookup finally reaches the end of
the path and gives you back the VNode for
the end file that you wished to target.
Probably worth mentioning that
Mac OS X has a singly rooted
hierarchical file system layout,
much like BSD.
The Carbon interfaces will
abstract that for you.
They'll know where all the
various mount points are.
And you can ask the Carbon interfaces
for a mount list and work
like you did in Mac OS 9.
But in Mac OS X,
there will be actually a complete
hierarchical file system list.
And so BSD calls will work.
And the Cocoa environment which
relies on that will also work.
And so lookup becomes a very
central routine in Mac OS X.
Open and close are what you're expecting.
They're the two routines that enable
you to start doing access to a file
and rip out that ability later.
Read and write.
Basic read and write.
Read and write routines.
Truncate, which is used to both
grow and shrink a file.
The name is a little unfortunate.
But you can truncate a file and send
its valid space way out to the end,
move its EOF.
Or you can also do a truncate
and reduce the size of a file,
cut it all the way to zero if you like.
Fsync is file synchronization.
This is the call that takes all of the
dirty buffers you may have associated
with your file in that system and
starts IO to the disk on those so that
we can get all the data flushed that we
have cached in memory out to the disk.
And you can make sure that
your file is in the disk.
You can make sure that your
file data is consistent.
It's a lot like flush files in Mac OS 9.
And vop remove,
that's basically the delete call.
As we mentioned before,
in order to give the full
range of abilities of HFS,
HFS+, things traditionally
associated with Mac OS,
we've extended the BSD interfaces to
add things like get adder list and
set adder list that will get you to
things like the catalog information,
allow you to do searching.
Well,
all of those calls are also supported
by underlying VNode operations.
And so if you wanted to
implement the file system that's
supported by the get adder list,
you implement vop get adder list the way
we did in HFS+, and then those abilities
will be available to your callers.
So now we're at the real hard stuff.
We want to talk to you about
this big change that we've just
made in our caching architecture.
And anybody who's actually
thinking of implementing a file
system will need to know this.
And we'll also tell you
about why we did it.
The changes in the caching
architecture were actually done by
the BSD team with some assistance
from the file systems group.
But this is something that spans
both file system development
and the virtual memory system.
And so we're fortunate.
I'm going to talk a little bit about
the beginnings of this and then
later I'm going to bring up Ramesh,
one of the BSD engineers,
who will tell you the details
about how that system worked.
This is a rough picture of
what our old cache looked like.
And up on the top, top of your right,
that big box that says VFS there,
that's the VFS interfaces we've
been talking to you about.
And then that's our underlying support
for all of the different file systems.
And this is,
I'm going to walk you through how
the buffering used to work when
a read call would come through.
Basically,
the overall BSD call read would come
in and it would go to the VFS layer,
it would dispatch to the appropriate
file system that was going to service it.
And then that file system would most
likely call the buffer cache underneath.
The buffer cache might have that data
already read in memory because you've
read it before or because you were doing
sequential access and we anticipated
that that page was going to be read and
we put it in memory for you in advance.
And it will satisfy the request
out of the buffer cache.
And if not,
then the buffer cache will call
back to one of your routines to
actually read the data off of the
device or get it off the network.
So that's the basic,
that's the basic deal.
Come in with a read,
go to the file system that supports it,
talk to the buffer cache,
try to satisfy the page.
And it generally works pretty
well and the buffer cache can
be used to optimize performance.
Well,
there's this other way of doing I/O in
our system that we call file mapping.
And some of you, if you've worked on BSD,
may be familiar with this.
But the idea is you can open up
a file and then you can decide
that a certain range of address,
by the way,
I appreciate the applause over there.
A certain range of address will
be backed by that particular file.
So you'll say, "Hey,
I'd like you to make addresses
1000 through 5000 valid for me,
and I want you to use as their backing
store this particular file that I'm
telling you about." And then if you read
anything in that array of addresses,
you'll get the data that's actually
in that file that you've decided is
mapped into that array of address.
So it's a very handy way of doing I/O,
but it does cause some interesting
problems for file systems.
The first one being the cache for the
virtual memory system is different
from the cache for the file system,
or at least it was in
earlier versions of Mac OS X.
And so to walk you through this,
you have a process.
He comes along, maps a range of data,
says he would like it backed
by this particular file,
and then starts reading the memory.
But what happens is the VM cache
will start doing I/O via new
calls called Page In and Page Out.
They'll eventually call
the file system underneath,
they'll get the data,
and then they'll put
it into the VM cache.
And the VM cache will then
satisfy those requests.
But what can also happen is one process
can open the file via read and write,
another process can map the file,
and either of those processes
can now write to it.
The read and write process is
going to write to it via the
normal file system read/write APIs,
and the data is going to be
cached in the buffer cache.
The mapped file is just going to
write into an array of memory,
and it's going to believe
that that maps into that file,
but in the meantime it's going to
be stored in the VM cache until
the VM system decides to flush it.
So if two processes
open up the same file,
it's going to be cached
in the buffer cache.
So if two processes open up the same
file via these different mechanisms,
they can actually wind up with
inconsistent data that corresponds
to the same address in the
file for that page of memory.
That's kind of actually diagrammed here.
You'll see a page of memory here in
our buffer cache that's supposed to
correspond to a page of data in the file,
another page in the VM cache,
and you can see how these
guys can become inconsistent.
So that's the big problem.
We have these two caches and the data
can become inconsistent in these two
caches because ReadWrite is using
the file system buffer cache and the
VM system is using a separate cache.
And as long as these things
were totally distinct,
you could get yourself into trouble.
Now to try to avoid some
of those problems in DP3,
there were a number of synchronization
points in the file system where we
would check with the VM system to
see if it had data and try to get
flushing to happen and so forth.
But there were still some holes in
there and while it was unlikely,
you might have stumbled across
some cases where your file system
data looks sort of inconsistent.
So what we've done-- let me tell
you what we did in Mac OS X Server.
We recognized that this
was a potential problem,
so we had a solution for this
issue in Mac OS X Server.
What we did was we implemented
something called the map file system.
And what it did was turn all
regular I/O into mapped I/O.
And so the VM cache became supreme
in a Mac OS X Server system.
You would do a read and
you would do a write,
and actually ultimately it
would turn into a map call,
and we would map it into a spot in
the kernel's address space as opposed
to the process's address space.
Well, that worked pretty well,
and it did get rid of the
potential data inconsistencies,
but the buffer cache was a fixed
size and rather tiny underneath.
That was a bit of an issue.
The VM system, again,
was reigning supreme,
and so some of that read ahead
stuff might not be happening.
There still were two copies
of data in the system.
Now while the VM cache was sort
of superimposed on the buffer
cache so that you would never
get the data inconsistent,
you could still replicate the data,
because the VM system would ask the file
system-- the file system would get out of
the buffer cache and it would go back up.
They were never different data.
for different data,
but there were still two copies,
and that was inefficient.
Only part of the file could
actually be mapped in the kernel.
We don't have the full range
of process address spaces.
We have one kernel address space.
And so that caused us to have to do
some funny things like potentially
throw out mappings for different
processes as new processes would come
and go and wish to do I/O because
we only had a limited address space.
That meant that not all currently
mapped files could necessarily be
mapped at the same time and you
might not be able to map the entire
file at once because we had to deal
with this limited address space.
So we're throwing mappings in and
out of the kernel all the time
causing potential performance issues.
And it also wasn't very friendly to
the file system because reads and
writes would come in and the file
system wouldn't get them right away.
They would be redirected
to the VM system.
The VM system had its caching going
and it would only call the file
system when it decided to flush
its cache or bring in new data.
And so if you wanted to have a counter
in your file system of all the reads
and writes that were taking place,
you wouldn't have them at
the time the user asked.
You'd only see them when the
VM system was ready to communicate.
So that was an issue too.
So what we've done is we've
just unified these caches.
Sounds simple, it was a lot of work,
but it's into DP4 and so we
got rid of all of these issues.
And now there's just one cache for both
the VM system and the file system and all
the pages that are associated with the
file are satisfied out of the same cache.
So to talk about some
of the details of that,
we've brought up Ramesh,
who's one of the BSD engineers,
and he'll walk you through
some of the implementation
of the unified buffer cache.
Hi, good afternoon.
My name is Ramesh.
Basically,
as you saw that Clark mentioned that we
had two kinds of caches in the system.
When we had the VM page cache,
which was a big thing,
and we had a tiny buffer cache,
which is much smaller,
which we were using to buffer cache,
we had a data inconsistency.
The way we used to construct
buffer cache was when a
Mac OS machine boots very early on,
the secondary loader then transfers
the control to the kernel.
When the kernel comes up,
initially it has a pool of pages.
Actually, this pool consists of all the
physical pages in the system except
for the pages that are consumed
by the kernel text and data itself.
What we used to do is carve out
a small portion of the pages from
there and then reserve them to
use exclusively for buffer cache.
And this is where the fixed size of the
buffer cache is coming because we used
to take a number of pages and we were
trying to use that for the buffer cache.
As Clark mentioned before,
we have one huge honking VM page
cache on one side and we had a
small buffer cache caching the two.
What we did basically was
To stop using the buffer
cache for the file data,
what we did instead was to turn all
the file data to the VM cache itself.
Now that we turn all the file
pages into the VM page cache,
we had to implement a mechanism to
track all the pages corresponding to
a particular file or a single page
corresponding to a particular file or a
particular offset in the VM page cache.
For this, at Apple,
we implemented a mechanism
called Universal Page Lists.
What Universal Page Lists does
for us is to get at a page,
a specific page in the system.
Universal Page Lists is a mechanism
to get at a page in a memory object.
And it actually also allows us
the physical access to the page
so that we can use that to do
DMA directly without ever mapping
inside the kernel address space.
If you want to know more
about the page lists,
the kernel session on the
Mac OS X is a very simple process.
On 106 on Thursday morning, 9:00,
they will discuss about this.
If you want to know more about this,
they will talk about it.
What we did was to use these UPLs,
Universal Page Lists,
and develop an infrastructure
underneath the buffer cache APIs.
The buffer cache APIs were like B-read,
B-write, get block, B-rails,
and things like that.
So not all the colors of the-- The colors
of the buffer cache APIs never have to
change because we maintain the same APIs.
We changed all the plumbing underneath
Thursday to use unified buffer cache.
We also wrote a set of routines
that we need to sprinkle all along
the different file systems to work
with the unified buffer cache.
The best way for me to explain all
this is to take different scenarios
in a lifecycle of a file and then see
how unified buffer cache works there.
First, let me take up the open.
Let's assume that we were
opening a file in HFS volume,
so that all the vNode operations that
I'm going to be talking about are
basically HFS plus vNode operations.
And let's also assume that
we're opening the file for
the first time in the system.
As part of the open system called
implementation in the kernel,
the first thing it tries to do,
as Clark mentioned before,
is to convert the path name from
path name to a file representation
inside the file system.
So basically that, for our example,
is going to be HFS lookup.
This HFS lookup is a vNodeOperation
lookup vNodeOperation HFS.
One of the things that it will
do is going to see whether
the file already exists.
And see whether it needs to
create a file if you pass the
correct flags for the open.
And then, what it does,
whether the file exists or not,
whether it created or the
file was already there,
it creates a VNode.
It creates a VNode for
that particular file.
All future references to the file,
all manipulations to the file from
now onwards goes through this VNode.
In the lookup,
we added our first support routines
that was talking about file system
support routines in the unified
buffer cache called UBC-Infinite.
What this UBC info does basically
is create a memory object and
create an association between
that memory object we just created
and the vNode we just created.
It's a one-to-one association.
For example, if we're looking at a 2000
offset inside this vNode,
it translates to a 2000 offset inside
the memory object that we created.
Now let me take another scenario where
We're just going to map the file.
Let's say we take first 32K of the file
and we map in the current address space.
Suppose a user,
this usually basically comes to
the kernel as an M-Map system call.
What we do in the M-Map system
call is basically set up a
pager and then allocate a 32K
range because my example is 32K.
We set a 32K address range in the user
process for this particular file mapping.
And then we return the address
of this where we allocated in
the user space back to the user
through the M-Map system call.
Note that we haven't done any page I/O,
any file I/O, nothing yet.
Nothing has happened yet.
When the user first
accesses this address space,
let's take it as, you know, for example,
he's reading the first byte
of this allocated range.
What happens at that point of time,
since there's no page
backing this address range,
it's going to generate a page fault.
The VM system goes and tries
to resolve the page fault.
The page is not there in the system,
so then it allocates a clean page
and then it tries to fill the data
from the file system for this page.
In our case,
since we're taking an example of HFS+,
it ultimately goes to the VNodePager
and falls into HFS Paging Call,
which's responsibility is
to copy the data from the
disk to this particular page,
which VM gave us, and then it returns the
page back to the VM.
And this page stays in the VM page
cache and all future modifications that
users would play with this particular
page would happen without any knowledge
in the file system or anywhere else.
Let's say for our example
we access some more pages.
I just put like sparse,
it's not always contiguous,
so 0 to 12K and then 20 to 32K
range of files we have touched.
Then, now I'm going to take a scenario
where we just want to do a write.
On, at an offset 15,
just to make it a little
bit more interesting,
like offset 15,
and then we'll just write only
10 bytes of data into the,
we want it to the file.
So we use a write system call to do that.
As part of the write system call,
implementations are the kernel,
which will then translate
to the particular BNode
operation for that file system,
which happens to be HFS write for us.
What we use,
we then use a universal page list
routine called VMFault List Request,
and we ask the VMFault List Request
to return us the page to
starting at an offset zero,
and the size which is
equal to the page size.
What it does is it gives us the
exclusive access to that page which
was residing in the VM page cache.
Once the page has been obtained,
we then copy the data from the user
buffer which he had to this page.
Once we copy the data
back into the system,
then depending on what
file systems want to,
they either can write up
the data immediately to
the disk or they can delay,
postpone writing to the disk.
In HFS we actually delay the writes.
Then, all we do then is basically
written the page back to the
VM page cache that we used to by
using a kernel UPL commit call,
which is also coming from
the universal page list.
So basically,
we did a copy of 10 bars into the system,
which the user who has mapped this
can also see the modifications
that were already done.
Okay, let's say I just took
another example where he just
dirtied another page as well.
I'm going to now move to take another
scenario where we're going to talk
about the WinRAR operation called Fsync,
WAP Fsync.
In our example,
it's going to be HFS Fsync.
Basically, the
HFS Fsync's responsibility is to
push all the modified data from
the buffers back to the disk.
Since we have modified
data in the VM page cache,
we have a new routine which
the Fsync also has to do,
apart from whatever it used to do before,
called UBC Push30.
What UBC Push30 does is goes and
looks at all the modified data
corresponding to this particular
file that was there in the VM page
cache and writes it back to the disk.
That's how all the data
goes to the system.
I forgot to mention that this Fsync,
you know, operation can come in two ways.
Once the user program can call a Fsync
system call to make sure that all the
modified data is pushed back to the disk.
Or it can also come from the
system which periodically runs
a system called called sync,
which goes through and looks at all
the modified data in the system for
all files and pushes them to disk.
So even if you don't
explicitly call a Fsync,
the data is synced back to the disk.
Now I'm going to take an
example of the truncate.
We just want to truncate
the file back to 16K.
Basically what I mean is the logical
end of the file is set to 16K.
So we have another support
routine called UBC set size.
Basically what it does is it invalidates
all the pages in the VM page cache which
are beyond the logical end of the file.
So as you can see in this diagram,
all the pages that were marked 20K, 24K,
38K, they're all gone.
They're all invalidated,
so they don't exist in the VM page cache.
Now, I'm going to go to the last
scenario that I want to talk
about where the file gets deleted.
So basically,
everything that we set up for so far,
we just have to tear everything down.
So we do that in three steps.
First, we call the UBC set size routine,
which I mentioned as
part of the truncate,
which basically takes away all the pages
that were there in the VM page cache.
Basically, we set it to zero as the
logical end of the size.
And then we also call another
function called UBC release,
which basically disassociates the memory
object association with the VNode.
And then we also need to call
another routine called UBC NCache,
which basically tells VM systems
don't ever cache that memory object,
because VM does cache all the
memory objects that it has.
So this basically gives us a whole
lot of overview like how we have
implemented the unified buffer cache
and what kind of set of proteins
that we did and things like that.
Now I'm just going to talk next two
slides about like what each file system
has to do and what kind of changes
each file system had to go through
to work with unified buffer cache.
While implementing the
unified buffer cache,
we introduced five new vNode operations.
Actually two of them are already there,
three of them are new.
And in this file, four are mandatory.
You need to have them to work with
UBC and the last one is optional.
The first part is a vNode
operation called block to offset.
What it basically does
is given a logical block,
it converts and gives
us back the file offset.
If you know already that all the
buffer cache is in the file set,
buffer cache routines like get block,
bread, everything works in
logical block numbers.
You tell bread, logical number, blah,
and then it returns the data back.
So since all the memory
objects work with the offsets,
this basically tells us what the offset
conversion for that block number is.
Because every file system can
have their own logical block size.
and the next one,
it does exactly opposite.
It actually translates from the
offset to a logical block number,
which we use it in the page to shoot
any buffers that are there in the cache.
We also have two next two on operations,
page and page.
They actually existed before
Unified Buffer Cache 2.
There's slight differences in there,
like we passed Unified Page List to that,
Universal Page List to that,
other than that there's
nothing changed there.
And then the last one is used
for the file system clustering.
It's called Cmap.
It's very similar to BMap.
What the BMap feed-on operation does
is given a logical block number,
it goes and computes the
actual disk block number so
that we can do an I/O on it.
What Cmap does is,
It takes a file offset instead
of the logical block number,
and it also returns the disk block number
corresponding so that we can do an I/O.
And it also tells us how much
continuous blocks are there from
that disk block onward so that
we can do a big chunk of I/O.
If anybody wants to use
file system clustering,
then they need to implement that too.
And as I already mentioned
in all my examples,
like the all file systems
have to sprinkle these five,
one, two, three, four, five, yes,
five support routines that we wrote.
So for example, just to recap them,
UBC in point eight,
we need to insert them
whenever we create a VNode.
And then we need to call UBC push dirty,
which basically whenever you want
to send the modified data back
from the VM page cache to the disk,
you need to implement that.
And then you need to call UBC set
size whenever your file size changes.
The file size can change, for example,
when you're growing a
file by write system call,
it changes the size.
That's the time when
you need to call them.
And also when you're shrinking the file,
we're using a truncate or making
a truncate to the far end.
In any case,
you need to call UBC set size.
And then when you actually delete a file,
most of the file system actually does,
but they don't do a truncate because they
need to get rid of all the disk blocks
that are allocated and things like that.
If you already don't do that,
then you need to do a UBC set size.
Otherwise, you need to do UBC release
and UBC uncache.
We're going to be having a -- we're
going to be putting a document saying
how to write file systems to UBC.
It will be there in
Darwin sometime in the near future.
That's a big resource.
And all the code for the unified
buffer cache and all the file
systems are there on the system.
It's already in the Darwin,
and it's already there
in the Darwin server now.
If you have any specific questions on
which corresponds to your file system,
then we can talk about it.
Come see me.
We can talk about it in the end.
Now I'll get Clark back on the stage.
Thanks.
Thanks, Ramesh.
All right, so that's it.
The only key thing left to tell
you about is that the next new
file system feature could be yours.
This is our Darwin slide.
If you're really interested in the
stuff we've talked about with UBC,
VNodeOps, and so forth, check out Darwin.
Take a look.
Take our code, please.
some of the new things,
some of the ideas we've
just sort of tossed around.
An NTFS implementation,
because we haven't gotten to it yet.
ProDOS, the stuff that used to ship
with Apple II machines.
We don't have a logical volume manager,
so Venom might be an
interesting thing to port.
We don't have a Linux file
system support yet,
so EX2FS might be an
interesting thing to port.
And, you know, of course,
there's always URFS,
something we haven't thought of yet.
Some stuff we'd like to
have you take away with you.
Choose your interface carefully.
Remember that there are some
subtle differences that happen
because of the volume format,
and there are some subtle differences in
what the interface is doing to not allow.
If you're doing a new
object-oriented application,
you want to use Cocoa.
If you need access to
the resource for it,
you may need a new Carbon, et cetera.
Be aware of those behavior differences
that Pat talked about between
Mac OS X and Mac OS 9 and also among
the different volume formats we support.
If you do want to implement a new
file system or a file system stack,
be sure it's necessary because you are,
as Dean Reese mentioned
in the IOCAD session,
going to be in the kernel,
and if there's something that goes wrong,
you'll crash the whole system.
Be sure you need to.
PhoneFS is probably not the
best way to do modem access,
for example.
And be aware of the unified buffer
cache because it has changed
the way file systems interact
with caching in the system.
And finally,
make sure you use Darwin as a resource.
And I'll mention now,
even before the roadmap slide,
that today at 6.30 in Hall J1,
there'll be a birds of a
feather session for the folks
that are interested in Darwin.
And if you have questions about Darwin,
you'll want to come to that Hall J1,
6.30 tonight.
Other sessions you
might be interested in,
there is a Mac OS X kernel
session tomorrow at 9
o'clock in the Civic Center.
And if you're curious
about universal page list,
there'll be some talk about that there.
There's also a Mac OS X application
packaging and document typing session
that may be important to go to if you
want to find out about how we're doing,
like, mapping launch bindings and icon
decisions and stuff like that.
That's going to be tomorrow
at 2 here in the big hall.
Mac OS X BSD support, it's going to be in
Hall A2 Friday at 3.30,
a crucial session if you're curious
about the BSD infrastructure
inside of Mac OS X.
Thank you.
And the feedback form
for Mac OS X overall,
I'll be there as well as all
the other Core OS managers.
That'll be in Room J1
Friday at 2 o'clock p.m.
If you have questions,
you want to get in contact with us about,
you know, closer relationships or get
on a mailing list or whatever,
give a shout to John Signa at
Cigna at Apple.com.
He's the technology manager
for Mac OS X in Apple Worldwide
Developer Relations.
I see we only have a couple minutes left,
and so we're not going to be able
to do questions here on the stage,
but my team will be in the back of the
hall over there if you want to come by.
And ask us questions,
and we'll also be at the Birds,
I will also be at the Birds of a Feather,
and I'll also be on campus tomorrow
from 7 to 9.30 for the big campus event.
So thanks a lot for your time.
We appreciate your coming.
Thank you.